File: 2045-709x-21-13.pdf
Pages: 7
============================================================

--- Page 1 ---

CASE REPORT
Open Access
Early adolescent lumbar intervertebral disc injury:
a case study
Chris T Carter1*, Lyndon G Amorin-Woods1 and Arockia Doss2
Abstract
This article describes and discusses the case of an adolescent male with lumbar intervertebral disc injury
characterized by chronic low back pain (LBP) and antalgia. A 13-year-old boy presented for care with a complaint of
chronic LBP and subsequent loss of quality of life. The patient was examined and diagnosed by means of history,
clinical testing and use of imaging. He had showed failure in natural history and conservative management relief in
both symptomatic and functional improvement, due to injury to the intervertebral joints of his lower lumbar spine.
Discogenic LBP in the young adolescent population must be considered, particularly in cases involving even trivial
minor trauma, and in those in which LBP becomes chronic. More research is needed regarding long-term
implications of such disc injuries in young people, and how to best conservatively manage these patients.
A discussion of discogenic LBP pertaining to adolescent disc injury is included.
Background
LBP in children and adolescence is an important and in-
creasing problem, and prevalence increases with age [1].
Systematic review and meta-analysis studies of LBP in
adolescence found mean LBP point prevalence and one-
year prevalence for adolescents to be around 12%, and
33% respectively [2,3]. Watson et al. [4] reported a one
month period prevalence of 24% in schoolchildren aged
11–14 years in northwest England. Historically consi-
dered as trivial and non-limiting, LBP in this age-group
may have both immediate and long-term consequences
for an important proportion of those affected [4]. Risk
factors have been debated, although ergonomics of
school furniture, school bag weight and mechanics,
trauma, history of scoliosis, and involvement of stre-
nuous physical activity may be associative or causative
factors in young persons with LBP [5]. There is also in-
creasing evidence that psychological and psychosocial
factors may play a significant influence in the aetiology
of LBP in this age group [6,7].
Most cases of LBP in the younger population are con-
sidered ‘mechanical’ and ‘uncomplicated’, with patho-
logical causes such as neoplasm and infection being very
rare [6]. Conservative management and natural history
are quite favourable, with the percentage of cases that
persist with discomfort longer than one week being less
than 15% [5,6]. Therefore, should a young person diag-
nosed with uncomplicated LBP not respond as quickly
as expected to conservative management, pathological
causes should again be considered and further clinical
examination undertaken. Additionally, less common,
non-pathological causes of low back pain such as ‘active’
spondylolysis must be re-introduced into the differential
diagnosis [8].
An important and probably underappreciated source
of LBP in children and young adolescent persons is the
intervertebral disc (IVD) joint. Lumbar disc herniation
(LDH), encompassing the categories of protrusion, ex-
trusion, and sequestration is well known to cause LBP
[9-11]. Involved in the herniation process are annular
tears and other intervertebral joint sources of LBP such
as end plate subchondral oedema [9]. For the paediatric
patient lumbar disc herniation is less common compared
to adults, affecting no more than 5% of the population,
and paediatric patients have been shown to constitute
only 0.5–6.8% of all patients hospitalized for LDH [12].
Multiple factors have been identified as potential causes,
with 30–60% of cases of children and adolescents with
symptomatic LDH having had a history of trauma before
the onset of their LBP [12].
This case study describes a young adolescent patient
with chronic intervertebral discogenic LBP who showed
* Correspondence: c_carter88@hotmail.com
1School of Health Professions, Murdoch University, Murdoch, Western
Australia, Australia
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
CHIROPRACTIC & MANUAL THERAPIES
© 2013 Carter et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Carter et al. Chiropractic & Manual Therapies 2013, 21:13
http://www.chiromt.com/content/21/1/13


--- Page 2 ---

lack of improvement with natural history and conserva-
tive management. We discuss intervertebral disc injury
in the young population, and clinically relevant patho-
physiology of IVD pain.
Case presentation
Clinical history and examination
A 13 year old male presented to a private chiropractic
clinic complaining of a four month history of localized
right LBP with no symptomatic referral into the lower
limbs. It was a daily annoyance, particularly worse at
night and in the mornings, although not affecting his
sleep to any significant degree. His pain was described as
“achy and annoying”, not allowing him to sit for long pe-
riods due to soreness. He could only remember a trivial
fall from his bicycle and landing on his buttocks around
the same time his back pain began, but he did not re-
member it causing him any significant pain or disability
at that time. Due to his pain levels he had missed weeks
off school, stopped most physical activities, and was ta-
king on average two to four 200 mg non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory’s (NSAID’s) daily. He had also been treated
sporadically on four occasions at various clinics conser-
vatively with chiropractic care which included high ve-
locity low amplitude (HVLA) and low force spinal
manipulation, myofascial release, and exercises. Both
NSAID and manual treatment provided only short-term
minimal relief. It was obvious that the patient had not
likely been following any recommended plan of manage-
ment from the previous practitioners.
Pertinent examination findings revealed a slightly
over-weight, non-distressed, adolescent with no signifi-
cant scoliosis or lumbar antalgia in standing neutral pos-
ition (Figure 1). When prompted, the patient pointed to
the right L4–S1 and sacroiliac joint zones as his main
area of discomfort. An Adam’s test was performed to as-
sess for scoliosis, in which the patient was asked to bend
straight forward and to try and touch his toes (Figure 2).
This movement reproduced his LBP and created an ab-
normal lateral lumbar deviation to the right, appearing
at the time to be a possible lumbar scoliotic curve. The
patient also stated he could not flex further than shown
due to pain levels and a feeling of significant low back
stiffness. Active lumbar range of motion (ROM) was
additionally painful in all other ranges, particularly ex-
tension, localised at the area of chief complaint. Right
lumbar Kemp’s test was positive.
Bilateral lower limb neurological examination was un-
remarkable, revealing 2+ patellar and achilles reflexes,
intact sensation to light touch of L1 to S2 dermatomes,
and 5/5 motor testing of L4 to S1 myotomes. Supine
examination revealed a Straight Leg Raise (SLR) test that
was negative for lower limb radicular pain production,
and limited to 45 degrees bilaterally due to significant
Figure 1 Posterior view of patient in neutral lumbar ROM. The
posterior view shows a non-distressed young male with no visible
scoliosis or antalgia.
Figure 2 Posterior view of patient in end-range active flexion
lumbar ROM. This movement reproduced his LBP and created an
abnormal right lateral lumbar deviation, appearing to be a possible
lumbar scoliotic curve.
Carter et al. Chiropractic & Manual Therapies 2013, 21:13
Page 2 of 7
http://www.chiromt.com/content/21/1/13


--- Page 3 ---

hamstring tightness. Anatomical leg length measurement
(ASIS to medial malleolus) was 90.0 cm right and
91.0 cm left.
Prone examination revealed an estimated right func-
tional short leg of 2.0 cm, and visually his right hemipelvis
was significantly cephalad and superior (heightened off the
table) oriented, compared to the left hemipelvis. Right
sided upper sacroiliac joint compression test was positive
for pain and restriction. Left upper sacroiliac joint com-
pression test was negative for pain but was restricted.
Palpation of the right quadratus lumborum, lumbar
erector spinae and multifidus muscles revealed signifi-
cant (3+) hypertonicity and tenderness. Right L4/5 and
L5/S1 facet joints were restricted during static and mo-
tion palpation. No other orthopaedic and manual phys-
ical examination findings regarding the hips, pelvis and
lower back were remarkable.
Diagnosis and radiology findings
A working diagnosis of ‘chronic mechanical low back
pain of lower lumbar facet and sacroiliac joint origin’
was made with probable concomitant lumbar idiopathic
adolescent scoliosis. Treatment was performed on the
first visit consisting of lumbar spinal mobilisations,
HVLA manipulation, myofascial release, core stability
exercises, and low back education (self-care). He was
also referred for lumbar series X-ray due to chronicity of
pain levels, assess for scoliosis, and to help rule out
pathological causes of his LBP due to the patient
reporting consistent night pain. He had not been pre-
viously referred for any type of imaging regarding this
low back complaint.
The patient represented for the second consultation
11 days later with no change in his LBP or examination
findings. Plain film X-ray lumbar spine series (supine)
were reviewed and read as ‘normal’ findings by the local
hospital imaging centre radiologist. Further chiropractic
review of the lateral lumbar view revealed a remarkable
small increase in bony sclerosis in the anterior half of
the sacral base (Figure 3). Of further interest, was the
absence of scoliotic curvature on the AP lumbar view
(Figure 4). Considering his abnormal functional right
sided antalgia during flexion ROM and no X-ray evi-
dence of scoliosis, the possibility of an IVD injury was
considered more likely. This was particularly appropriate
given the history of initial injury being a compressive
axial force through the lumbar spine after falling off his
bicycle, and chronicity of pain. It was postulated there
could have been enough force to cause injury to the
lumbar IVD’s, vertebral body endplate’s, or even the ver-
tebral body.
The patient was subsequently referred for MRI exam-
ination of the lumbar spine by the chiropractor to a pri-
vate facility on the second visit to assess for lower
lumbar annulus fibrosus lesion, disc herniation and in-
flammatory adjacent marrow oedema. These lesions
were considered possible pain-inducing candidates given
the patients clinical picture of chronicity, painful antalgia
and night pain.
In this case, lumbar MRI evaluated by the private fa-
cility medical radiologist, revealed several clinically rele-
vant findings as a probable cause of his resilient LBP.
Figures 5 and 6 show several intervertebral disc joint le-
sions that are of plausible clinical significance. Figure 5
shows two annular tears that can be seen posteriorly as
annulus fibrosis hyperintensity, known also as high in-
tensity zone (HIZ), at the L4/5 and L5/S1 discs. The L4/
L5 and L5/S1 discs also reveal a shallow focal disc pro-
trusion. At L5/S1, disc height reduction, loss of signal
intensity, and mild adjacent L5 and S1 subchondral mar-
row oedema is seen. Figure 6, reveals a sizeable area of
hypointensity (from past intraosseous herniation) seen
in the anterior half of the sacral base. This represents
chronic marrow repair, most probable from past com-
pressive trauma to the area. Interestingly, this area of
damage correlates to the line of sclerosis seen on the AP
plain film X-ray.
Case management
Twenty-one days post initial consultation, the patients
third consultation consisted of a review of the MRI
Figure 3 Lateral lumbar X-ray view. Note the suspicious area of
increased sclerosis in the anterior half of the sacral base.
Carter et al. Chiropractic & Manual Therapies 2013, 21:13
Page 3 of 7
http://www.chiromt.com/content/21/1/13


--- Page 4 ---

findings, as well as a recommendation to the mother
that her son attends the additional opinion of a paediat-
ric spine specialist for co-management. The short and
long term prognosis of this patient’s low back condition
was of utmost importance, particularly as the patient
was already in initial stages of puberty and therefore his
growth will be highly accelerated in the following years.
His antalgia and chronic low back pain were significantly
affecting his quality of life, and his chronic use of
NSAID’s in itself constituted a health risk [13]. Referral
to a specialist for co-management was deemed the most
appropriate short-term measure, in addition to conserva-
tive management which would focus primarily on tissue-
sparring injury education, postural pain management,
core and hip stability rehabilitation, flexibility, and chiro-
practic passive care. The patient was referred to his
medical General Practitioner via letter with a detailed
description of clinical situation and imaging results,
recommending subsequent specialist referral. Following
the third consultation, the patient did not return for fur-
ther chiropractic management.
Further verbal follow-up with the patient and his
mother two months later revealed that the patient was
to see a specialist shortly. Five months later, the lead au-
thor received a clinical update letter from a specialist
paediatric rheumatologist dated 10 months post LBP
commencement. This letter indicated that the patient
had been sent for blood tests which revealed a com-
pletely normal full blood count, ESR, ANA and Rheuma-
toid Factor. He had been diagnosed with ‘Lumbar
Spondylitis’, was no longer taking Naproxen, and had
been sent for a hospital based physiotherapy rehabilita-
tion course of management involving stretches and
Figure 4 Antero-posterior X-ray lumbar view. Note the absence
of scoliosis.
Figure 5 MRI, sagittal STIR midline image. Annular tears are seen
as posterior annulus fibrosus hyperintensity (bottom two arrows
pointing to white dots) at L4/5 and L5/S1 discs. Compare with low
signal (dark) of the normal L3/4 disc (top arrow).
Figure 6 MRI, sagittal STIR view. The L5/S1 subchondral bone
marrow hyperintensity (areas of white) seen on both sides of the
L5/S1 disc (arrows), is suggestive of annular injury and ongoing
inflammatory response. L4/5 right paramedian disc protrusion, and
L5/S1 disc height reduction with dehydration and right
posterolateral disc protrusion that appears chronic. Anterior sacral
base bone marrow hypointensity indicates chronic marrow repair.
Carter et al. Chiropractic & Manual Therapies 2013, 21:13
Page 4 of 7
http://www.chiromt.com/content/21/1/13


--- Page 5 ---

strengthening exercises. The patient reported that he
was significantly better over the last several months,
with only occasional niggles, but still had LBP and lim-
ited movement down his right leg with ROM. Paediatric
rheumatologist examination revealed that he still had a
rather stiff lumbar spine with limited forward flexion
and slight discomfort with extension but good thoracic
rotation. There was no tenderness and his peripheral
joints were completely normal. Assessment summary re-
vealed that currently things were stable, but that he was
still somewhat limited. A repeat MRI was to be com-
pleted shortly with a subsequent follow up examination.
This patient’s second lumbar MRI, 10 months post LBP
commencement, revealed ‘unaltered changes at L4/5 and
L5/S1 since the initial MRI’. The lead author only had
access to the report, and there was no mention on this
report regarding subchondral oedema or annular tears
(HIZ’s).
No further information regarding this patient was re-
ceived. It can therefore be assumed that although his
LBP and ROM improved significantly after ten months,
he still had LBP and sub-optimal low back function. To
any health practitioner, this would be considered not
normal for a 14 year-old boy, and worrisome for the
long-term functional health of his lumbar spine.
Discussion
Most childhood and young adolescent LBP cases are un-
complicated in origin and mechanical in nature [6]. Pa-
tients tend to respond quickly and successfully to natural
history and/or conservative management, and their back
pain only uncommonly progresses to become chronic.
Childhood development of chronic LBP is one of the
major reasons for chronic LBP in adulthood [7]. Children
experiencing persistent or recurrent chronic pain have
been shown to miss school, and have higher chance of de-
veloping conditions such as depression and anxiety [1].
This case study highlights the importance of recogniz-
ing the intervertebral disc, vertebral end plates, and
subchondral vertebral bone as possible sources of LBP
in the young patient. If LBP becomes chronic and unre-
sponsive to conservative management, these structures
must be considered as possible sites of nociceptive origin
and resultant disability. This assumption is not meant to
minimalize or forget the effects of neurological periph-
eral and/or central sensitizations role in chronic LBP,
which is beyond the discussion this case study’s clinical
importance it is trying to achieve.
The chronicity of this patient’s pain and mild relief from
conservative management were indications that his LBP
was more complex in origin, compared to typical mechan-
ical LBP. The antalgia seen during physical examination
motion evaluation was abnormal for a 13 year old, and
could not be attributed to a scoliosis. It is unusual for
antalgia to be caused by neural or other pernicious path-
ology [14]. Therefore, it is prudent to consider an interver-
tebral disc injury as a cause of abnormal painful antalgia
in the young adolescent population. Zhu et al. [15]
reviewed the clinical features and treatment strategy of
LDH in adolescents initially misdiagnosed as idiopathic
scoliosis. All patients had initially presented with a scoli-
otic curve as their chief complaint, yet curvature and dis-
ability did not resolve until surgical management of the
affected discs was undergone.
Many paediatric and early adolescent lumbar disc injur-
ies have been historically attributed to trauma such as falls
and sports-related trauma [12]. However, it is becoming
more widely regarded that, as in adult LDH, in some cases
minor trauma and/or repetitive biomechanical stress may
be the provocative event in the exacerbation of a disc that
is already herniating and/or undergoing degeneration due
to genetic predisposition [11,12,16,17]. Interestingly, up to
57% of adolescent LDH patients have a first degree relative
with a lumbar herniation history [11,12].
Zhu et al. [15] found a high incidence of significant
hamstring tightness in adolescent LDH patients, al-
though, it is still unclear whether hamstring tightness is
an inducing or ensuing factor of LDH. Our patient had
very prominent posterior lower limb myofascial tight-
ness, limited to 45 degrees during SLR test bilaterally.
In this case, MRI was helpful in showing annulus
fibrosus lesion via HIZ’s, LDH, and inflammatory adja-
cent marrow oedema. It is reasonable to postulate that
these lesions seen on his MRI were significantly involved
causes for his chronic LBP. It has been proven that some
disc lesions in adults, even when visualized on MRI, are
not clinically symptomatic [18]. Kjaer et al. [19] under-
took a large study of 439 thirteen-year-old children and
assessed lumbar MRI findings. One third of the children
showed some sort of lumbar degenerative disc sign,
most commonly loss of disc signal intensity. Interest-
ingly, only 24 (5%) had HIZ’s, 11 (3%) had a disc protru-
sion, 1 (0.5%) had a type 1 Modic change, and 0 (0%)
had a type 2 Modic change. Positive associations be-
tween degenerative disc findings and self-reported LBP
were found, and there was a strong association between
those children that ‘sought care of a practitioner for
their LBP’ and disc protrusions and HIZ’s. In our case,
considering the mechanism of original injury to the lum-
bar spine some four months prior, and lack of improve-
ment with treatment and natural history, it was assumed
that there was reasonable causal relationship between
the mechanism of the fall, the intervertebral disc and
endplate injuries found on MR Imaging, and his chronic
LBP.
Most anatomical elements of the lumbar spine and its
surrounding soft tissue network contain nociceptive inner-
vations that may be origins of LBP. It is widely accepted
Carter et al. Chiropractic & Manual Therapies 2013, 21:13
Page 5 of 7
http://www.chiromt.com/content/21/1/13


--- Page 6 ---

that both the outer annulus fibrosus of the IVD and cartil-
aginous vertebral endplate are sources of discogenic LBP
[17]. Discogenic pain can arise from structural failure and
bulging of the disc [17]. Our patient’s most uncomfortable
daytime position for LBP was sitting. The lumbar disc
space pressure is highest in the sitting position, thus
putting increased physical and gravitational stress on the
patient’s annular tissue and endplates, thus causing me-
chanical stretch of nociceptors in these areas [20].
Discogenic LBP also originates from nociceptive neural
and vascular in-growth in the outer annulus, into annu-
lar tears, and can cause peripheral sensitisation [17].
These inflammatory factors may have likely been of par-
tial cause of our patients’ night and morning pain and
stiffness.
Degenerative vertebral endplate injury and subchondral
bone marrow oedema seen on MRI are known as Modic
changes, and are arguably a source of LBP [21,22].
Figure 6 showed the subchondral bone marrow hyperin-
tensity on both sides of the posterior half of the L5/S1 disc
which is reflective of inflammatory bone marrow annular
injury
and
ongoing
inflammatory
response
in
the
subchondral bone (Type 1 Modic). It also showed sub-
chondral marrow hypointensity seen in the anterior half
of the sacral base, which is reflective of marrow histo-
logical change (Type 2 Modic). Currently, only type 1
changes have been proven to be a source of LBP [22]. It is
possible that at least some of this patient’s LBP can be at-
tributed to the changes associated with the modic changes
occurring at his vertebral endplates, and therefore his pain
could be of vertebral endplate and subchondral bone ori-
gin. As stated previously, our patient had a sizeable area of
Type 2 modic change in the sacral base, and this was not
found in any of 439 thirteen year-old children in the Kjaer
et al. [19] study.
A review by Dang et al. [12] of current treatment for
lumbar disc herniation made recommendations regarding
management of childhood disc injury. They stated that
conservative management of adolescent disc injury is the
first choice treatment, particularly in those patients with-
out significant neurological deficits. A growing spine is at
risk to surgical trauma and other iatrogenic reactions that
can develop after surgical intervention. However, with
regards to LDH, current evidence agreed that success with
conservative management for adolescent LDH is not as ef-
fective as it is for adults, and surgical complications are
relatively rare.
Currently, there is a lack of evidence regarding best
practice conservative management for adolescent interver-
tebral disc injury when there is no significant neurological
deficit. This is most likely due to the fact that this is not a
common clinical condition in everyday practice. There are
numerous manual therapy techniques that may be well
suited for a trial of conservative management for this type
of back pain presentation. The discussion of these types of
therapies, as well as other non-surgical therapies for
discogenic LBP, such as percutaneous injections, is well
beyond the means of this article.
In our case, it was seen prudent for referral to a paediat-
ric specialist, due to the fact that the patient had not
followed any recommended course of conservative man-
agement, lack of natural history improvement, injuries
sustained to the lower lumbar spine, and development of
chronic LBP. This referral helped ensure all appropriate
clinical measures were taken to limit long term IVD injury
consequences in his rapidly growing spine and help pre-
vent internalizing behaviour change. This case highlights
the importance of a multidisciplinary management of a
young person suffering from chronic discogenic LBP.
Conclusion
The prevalence of childhood and adolescent LBP is more
common than once thought. Discogenic pain from an-
nular tears, herniation and vertebral endplate injury,
must be
considered
particularly
in
cases
involving
chronic LBP, and lack of response to conservative man-
ual therapy. MRI can be useful in appropriately con-
necting
patient
history,
physical
examination,
and
imaging findings to correlate the most likely cause of a
patient’s LBP. It should be used particularly when con-
servative management and/or natural history fails to re-
solve the LBP disorder. Specialist referral is warranted
when pain levels are intractable or when continuous
pain and disability occurs after a course of conservative
management. Speedy resolution of lumbopelvic function
is considered important to help limit any long term dele-
terious effects on spinal growth and therefore improve
quality of life in young persons. More research is needed
regarding long-term implications of IVD injuries in
people of such young age, and how best to conserva-
tively manage them.
Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s
legal guardian [mother] for publication of this case report
and any accompanying images. A copy of the written con-
sent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this
journal.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
CC cared for the patient, performed the literature review, and prepared the
manuscript. LA-W performed the literature review and assisted in the
preparation of the manuscript. AD assisted in radiological interpretation, and
authored the MRI results section. All author’s read and approved the final
manuscript.
Carter et al. Chiropractic & Manual Therapies 2013, 21:13
Page 6 of 7
http://www.chiromt.com/content/21/1/13


--- Page 7 ---

Author details
1School of Health Professions, Murdoch University, Murdoch, Western
Australia, Australia. 2Specialist Radiologist, Image Guided Therapy Clinic,
Nedlands, Western Australia, Australia.
Received: 31 December 2012 Accepted: 23 April 2013
Published: 26 April 2013
References
1.
King S, Chambers CT, Huguet A, et al: The epidemiology of chronic pain in
children and adolescents revisited: A systematic review. Pain 2011,
152:2729–2738.
2.
Louw QA, Morris LD, Grimmer-Somers K: The prevalence of low back pain
in Africa: a systematic review. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 2007, 8:105.
3.
Calvo-Munoz I, Gomez-Conesa A, Sanchez-Meca J: Prevalence of low back
pain in children and adolescents: a meta-analysis. BMC Pediatr 2013, 13:14.
4.
Watson KD, Papageorgiou AC, Jones GT, et al: Low back pain in
schoolchildren: occurrence and characteristics. Pain 2002, 97(1–2):87–92.
5.
Kaspiris AGT, Zafiropoulou C, et al: Nonspecific low back pain during
childhood: a retrospective epidemiological study of risk factors.
J Clin Rheumatol 2010, 16:55–60.
6.
Jones GT, Macfarlane GJ: Epidemiology of low back pain in children and
adolescents. Arch Dis Child 2005, 90:312–316.
7.
Feldman DE, Shrier I, Rossignol M, et al: Risk factors for the development
of low back pain in adolescence. Am J Epidemiol 2001, 154:30–36.
8.
Miller SF, Congeni J, Swanson K: Long-term functional and anatomical
follow-up of early detected spondylolysis in young athletes. Am J Sports
Med 2004, 32(4):928–933.
9.
Peng B, Chen J, Kuang Z, et al: Diagnosis and surgical treatment of back
pain originating from endplate. Eur Spine J 2009, 18:1035–1040.
10.
Ahn Y, Lee S-H: Outcome predictors of percutaneous endoscopic lumbar
discectomy and thermal annuloplasty for discogenic low back pain.
Acta Neurochir 2010, 152:1695–1702.
11.
Kumar R, Kumar V, Das NK, et al: Adolescent lumbar disc disease: findings
and outcome. Childs Nerv Syst 2007, 23:1295–1299.
12.
Dang L, Liu Z: A review of current treatment for lumbar disc herniation
in children and adolescents. Eur Spine J 2010, 19:205–214.
13.
Beehrle DM, Evans D: A review of NSAID complications: gastrointestinal
and more. Lippincotts Prim Care Pract 1999, 3(3):305–315.
14.
Liebenson C: Acute spinal antalgia paradigms of Mckenzie method
derangement management. In Rehabilitation of the Spine: A practitioner’s
manual. 2nd edition. Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2007:340.
15.
Zhu ZZ, Qui Y, Wang B, et al: Clinical evaluation of adolescent lumbar disc
herniation misdiagnosed as idiopathic scoliosis. Zhonghua Wai Ke Za Zhi
2008, 46(14):1058–1061.
16.
Sun ZM, Miao L, Zhang YG, et al: Association between the −1562 C/T
polymorphism of matrix metalloproteinase-9 gene and lumbar disc
disease in the young adult population in North China. Connect Tissue Res
2009, 50(3):181–185.
17.
Choi Y-S: Pathophysiology of degenerative disc disease. Asian Spine J
2009, 3(1):39–44.
18.
Shabandar L, Press J: Diagnosis and nonoperative management of lumbar
disk herniation. Oper Tech Sports Med 2005, 13:114–121.
19.
Kjaer P, Leboeuf-Yde C, Sorensen JS, et al: An epidemiologic study of MRI
and low back pain in 13-year-old children. Spine 2005, 30(7):798–806.
20.
Gilbert J, Wheeler GR, Kreft MP, et al: Repeat upright positional magnetic
resonance imaging for diagnosis of disorders underlying chronic
noncancer lumbar pain. J Manipulative Physiol Ther 2008, 31:627–631.
21.
Rahme R, Moussa R: The modic vertebral endplate and marrow changes:
pathological significance and relation to low back pain and segmental
instability of the lumbar spine. AJNR 2008, 29:838–842.
22.
Thompson K, Dagher AP, Eckel TS, et al: Modic changes on MR images as
studied with provocative discography: clinical relevance- a retrospective
study of 2457 disks. Radiology 2009, 250(3):849–855.
doi:10.1186/2045-709X-21-13
Cite this article as: Carter et al.: Early adolescent lumbar intervertebral
disc injury: a case study. Chiropractic & Manual Therapies 2013 21:13.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
Carter et al. Chiropractic & Manual Therapies 2013, 21:13
Page 7 of 7
http://www.chiromt.com/content/21/1/13
